Today’s News Highlights
• Share of foreign traders at NSE rebounds to 47pc in second quarter
The share of trading activity at the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) attributed to foreign investors grew to an average of 46.68 percent during the three months ended June 2025, rebounding from a fall witnessed in the preceding quarter as jitters over anticipated US tariffs suppressed investor sentiment. In the quarter to March 2025, the participation of foreigners had fallen to 38.24 percent, down from a higher 43.83 percent during the three months ended December 2024. New data from the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) shows that foreign participation remained largely towering at 59.51 percent in April before falling off a cliff to 36.06 percent in May and later rising to 44.47 percent in June.
• Banks to get priority in bonds trading shake-up
Commercial banks will get priority in buying Treasury bonds under a proposed shift outside the auction system, which is expected to revitalise government paper trading and lower returns. The Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) has issued draft regulations for the creation of a separate market for bond trading or over the counter (OTC) where the banks or market makers will set the price and buy nearly the whole government paper. This will make the top banks wholesalers of government securities, with the role of buying in bulk and selling to other investors.   
•  Global think-tanks trim Kenya’s growth outlook on civil unrest
At least six multinational banks, consultancies and think-tanks have marginally downgraded Kenya’s economic growth outlook on the recent wave of violent anti-government protests. Economists at Moody’s Analytics, Fitch Solutions, Standard Chartered Bank of London, Allianz of Germany, Fitch Ratings and Citigroup Global Markets, have trimmed growth projections by between 10 and 40 basis points, largely citing the impact of bloody social unrest on investment sentiment. Overall, a consensus outlook from 14 firms, compiled by Barcelona-based Focus Economics, indicates the economy will likely expand 4.9 percent compared with 5.0 percent a month ago. 
• State to remove ownership limits in stockbrokers, fund managers
The government has moved to remove shareholding limits for stockbrokers and investment banks in a bid to lure deep-pocketed investors into owning and managing intermediary companies at the capital markets. In amendments tabled in Parliament, the government is proposing to delete clauses in the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) Act, which cap individual shareholding in stockbrokerages, investment banks, fund managers and derivatives broker at 33.3 percent. The proposals are contained in the Capital Markets Amendment Bill, 2025 that has been tabled by the Leader of Majority Kimani Ichung’wah, as a representative of the government. 
• Heed Moody’s warning on domestic borrowing 
The latest warning by credit rating agency Moody's on Kenya’s growing appetite for domestic borrowing is a stark reminder of the need to get serious about austerity and prudent public spending.Rising government borrowing from local markets, it says, will crowd out private sector credit, push up interest rates, and stifle investment. Kenyan economists have raised the alarm since April last year, when domestic debt overtook external borrowing. But Moody’s voice should be taken even more seriously because it can directly influence our debt pricingy. Admittedly, domestic borrowing is a safer bet than costly commercial loans that have driven Kenya toward debt distress. But ending budgeted corruption and cutting waste is better than any form of borrowing.
Courtesy: of Business Daily