Today’s News Highlights
• Banks to lend at same loan base rate in CBK’s U-turn
The Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) has retreated from its plans to control lending rates using its benchmark rate, handing a victory to commercial lenders who preferred to use the interest charged on short-term loans between banks to determine borrowing costs. Official correspondence between the CBK and commercial banks shows that the banking sector regulator has made a U-turn and abandoned its earlier proposal that lenders use the Central Bank Rate (CBR) as the base for pricing loans. Instead, the market will now use the average interbank rate — fronted by industry lobby Kenya Bankers Association (KBA)-- to determine consumer borrowing costs. “CBK proposes the use of the interbank rate as the common reference rate for determining lending rates for all customers. The total lending rate will be the interbank rate plus a premium (K),” the CBK said in a document dated July 20, 2025 seen by the Business Daily. 
• Why Kenyans still favour investing in saccos, banks
Familiarity has seen Kenyans continue to favour investing through traditional vehicles such as savings and credit co-operative organisations (saccos) and commercial banks, even as the market evolves to include multiple alternative avenues. Most people remain in the traditional products despite their desire for higher returns, signaling a high degree of risk averseness and a goal of preserving capital. These investment vehicles continue to lead the way despite proliferation of new avenues including money market funds, retail friendly government infrastructure bonds and offshore products. According to a new survey by ICEA Lion Asset Management (Ilam), published on Monday and which was derived from interviews conducted on 1,200 individuals across the country, saccos top the investment vehicle preference at 27 percent.  
•  How non-auction of Treasury bonds will affect market
The Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) has recently published draft guidelines on establishment of an over-the counter (OTC) market for government securities. One of the changes to the market in the proposed system will see introduction of market makers, or liquidity providers. These will be drawn from top commercial banks, tasked with establishing wholesale market for securities—effectively coming in as an intermediary between the issuer (CBK) and the retail market. The Business Daily looks at the potential impact of the proposed changes on government securities and investors who have recently taken a liking to bonds as an investment option. An OTC market allows investors to trade their securities with each other on a decentralised platform that sits away from a formal exchange. 
• Moody’s sees erosion risks on Kenya forex reserves
High external debt service needs will strain Kenya’s forex reserve buffers if no new concessional inflows are received, global sovereign credit rating firm Moody’s has warned. Although the country has a five month import cover, it said, external loans amortisation of around three percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) could lead to a drawdown on reserves or renewed commercial borrowing in the absence of fresh multilateral funding. Amortisation of loans is a repayment structure that requires regular, equal loan repayments for a set period. 
• Why more Irish firms are eyeing East Africa 
More Irish businesses are looking at East African countries including Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda for expansion marking a shift from South Africa and Nigeria that have traditionally served as their launchpads into Africa. The development was revealed during a recent Africa-Ireland Trade Horizons Conference held in Dublin, Ireland where businesses, trade bodies and government officials met to discuss emerging opportunities on the continent. East Africa emerged as one of the attractive destinations for Irish businesses, with several firms that already have a presence in countries such as Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania lining up more investments. 
Courtesy: of Business Daily