Today’s News Highlights
• Institutional investors overtake individuals in NSE share trading
Institutional investors have overtaken individuals in the share of equities trading at the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) as the high-net-worth dealers shift part of their investments from government papers. Data from the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) show that the share of equities trading controlled by local institutional investors, such as pension schemes and insurance firms, surged to 67.65 percent in the quarter ended June from 36.34 percent in the same period a year earlier. They have outpaced retail investors whose share dipped from 45.28 percent to 15.21 percent in the period under review, suggesting individuals have cut back on share purchases as large-scale dealers upped their stakes. The shifts emerge in a period when returns from the bourse continue to beat yields from the bond market. 

• Higher fuel prices to test inflation target point
The rising fuel prices are likely to test the inflation sweet spot or the government’s midpoint target of five percent, according to analysts who see a larger impact from the high cost of petroleum products if sustained. The observation is in the backdrop of a disclosure by the Ministry of Energy that the State has depleted the subsidy fund used to stabilize retail fuel prices which exposes consumers to volatile global shifts that have seen the cost of diesel and petrol jump by at least Sh8.67 per litre in Kenya. The government has failed to apply the subsidy for two months in a row since May, with the subsequent higher fuel prices setting the stage for sharper consumer prices including transport, food and energy. 

•  EU’s lopsided Trump trade deal will be short-lived
European Union trade negotiators may promptly celebrate the success they have achieved by clinching a deal with Donald Trump. If so, the question should be: If that passes for success, what would failure have looked like? Financial markets and European captains of industry will doubtless heave a sigh of relief at the agreement, announced on Sunday by the US president and his European Commission counterpart Ursula von der Leyen. The continent’s main exporters can base their investment and commercial plans on the 15 percent levy on US imports accepted by the Commission. 
 
• State spending on development projects sinks to new low, hurts jobs creation
Cash drawn directly from the national government’s main account for domestically financed development projects, as a share of total expenditure, has fallen to a single-digit rate for the second year running, hurting the creation of new job opportunities for the growing skilled youth population. Government ministries, departments, and agencies spent Sh335.08 billion on development projects from the exchequer against a total withdrawal of Sh3.57trillion for the financial year ended June 2025. 
• ‘Pesa mfukoni’: How to rescue an economy in free fall 
To the awkward retort of an unloved administration, The Economist of London has portrayed Kenya critically in an influential two-punch editorial and article Wrecking a Country (July 5, 2025).Targeted repression of “GenZ,” the generation that former President Mwai Kibaki’s economic revival from 2002 unleashed with reforms, is hard to defend. Kibaki shifted to Vision 2030 and an appropriate macro-economic policy mix resuscitating the beggarly economy left by former President Daniel arap Moi. In 10 years, growth climbed from 0.5 percent gross domestic product in 2002 to 8.4 percent by 2010. Fiscal discipline cut government domestic borrowing through banks, releasing affordable credit for private sector growth. 

Courtesy: of Business Daily