2025-07-25

Today’s News Highlights
• External funding an uphill task without IMF and WB –Moody’s
Global credit rating agency Moody’s says Kenya will face difficulties in sourcing external financing without having programmes from the World Bank or the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in place. The ratings agency says Kenya will likely dent its official foreign currency reserves on debt service without the support of the multilateral lenders. Moreover, Moody's reckons that the country would face hurdles in accessing external financing as creditors view the presence of a concessional funding programme as a sign of confidence in the nation’s creditworthiness. Moody’s warning comes at a time when Kenya has been unable to unlock Sh96.9 billion ($750 million) from the World Bank on unmet terms. The country is also without a programme from the IMF following the fund’s termination of a multi-year arrangement with Kenya in March over missed targets including revenue underperformance. 
• Sacco deposits to be insured in new changes
Member deposits in savings and credit cooperative organisations (saccos) are finally set to be insured if Parliament approves proposals to create a special fund to protect depositors against losses in the event that an institution goes under. In proposed changes tabled in Parliament by Majority Leader Kimani Ichung’wah, the State aims to create a Deposit Guarantee Fund (DGF) that would serve as an insurance policy for reimbursing sacco depositors – up to a certain limit – mirroring the scheme already in place for commercial banks. “A member of a sacco society may, upon the sacco society’s licence or authorisation being revoked, lodge a claim with the Deposit Guarantee Fund, in such form and within such time as the Deposit Guarantee Fund may determine,” the Sacco Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2025 says. 
•  Bond investors press for higher rates on new auctions
Investors in government securities have intensified pressure on the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) to offer higher rates on new auctions, looking to take advantage of the government’s need to borrow heavily to fund a large fiscal deficit. Last week’s Treasury bills auction saw investors demand 8.8 percent on the 91-day paper, which was a significant premium on the paper’s prevailing interest rate of 8.13 percent. The buyers put up offers of Sh1.96 billion, with the CBK settling for Sh1.95 billion at 8.12 percent on accepted bids. Similarly, the July bond sale, which comprised a pair of reopened 20 and 25-year papers, saw investors demand yields of 13.95 percent and 14.43 percent versus coupons (actual interest rates) of 13.2 percent and 13.4 percent respectively. 
• Higher education funding model is faulty, says auditor
Deserving students were denied funding because the higher education funding model is faulty, according to Auditor-General Nancy Gathungu. In her report, Ms Gathungu noted that undeserving students, including those who had deferred their studies, were allocated money, thanks to the funding model’s numerous shortcomings. The audit attributed the problems that the model is facing to lack of integration between it and the Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Services (KUCCPS) system. 
• KRA customs system set for major upgrade
 The Kenya Revenue Authority(KRA) cargo management system is set for a major overhaul this year as part of a shift to automated operations and deployment of artificial intelligence. The taxman clears cargo on a system known as the Integrated Cargo Management System (iCMS). KRA Commissioner General Humphrey Wattanga said the upgrade would boost efficiency in cargo management. “The future of customs lies in smart systems, data-driven risk management, and fully automated processes,” he said in an address during launch of the Kenya International Freight and Warehousing Association (Kifwa) 2025–2030 strategic plan in Nairobi on Thursday.
Courtesy: of Business Daily